PMID: 37762577
Score: 11
Abstract: The evolving history of BRCA1 research demonstrates the profound interconnectedness of a single protein within the web of crucial functions in human cells. Mutations in BRCA1, a tumor suppressor gene, have been linked to heightened breast and ovarian cancer risks. However, despite decades of extensive research, the mechanisms underlying BRCA1's contribution to tissue-specific tumor development remain elusive. Nevertheless, much of the BRCA1 protein's structure, function, and interactions has been elucidated. Individual regions of BRCA1 interact with numerous proteins to play roles in ubiquitination, transcription, cell checkpoints, and DNA damage repair. At a cellular scale, these BRCA1 functions coordinate tumor suppression, R-loop prevention, and cellular differentiation, all of which may contribute to BRCA1's role in cancer tissue specificity. As research on BRCA1 and breast cancer continues to evolve, it will become increasingly evident that modern materials such as Bisphenol A should be examined for their relationship with DNA stability, cancer incidence, and chemotherapy. Overall, this review offers a comprehensive understanding of BRCA1's many roles at a molecular, cellular, organismal, and environmental scale. We hope that the knowledge gathered here highlights both the necessity of BRCA1 research and the potential for novel strategies to prevent and treat cancer in individuals carrying BRCA1 mutations.

PMID: 37627161
Score: 11
Abstract: BRCA1 is a tumor suppressor with a complex mode of action. Hereditary mutations in BRCA1 predispose carriers to breast cancer, and spontaneous breast cancers often exhibit defects in BRCA1 expression. However, haploinsufficiency or suppression of BRCA1 expression leads to defects in DNA repair, which can induce DNA damage responses, leading to senescence. Activating mutation or overexpression of the Her2 oncoprotein are also frequent drivers of breast cancer. Yet, over-activation of Her2, working through the RAS oncoprotein, can also induce senescence. It is thought that additional defects in the p53 and Rb tumor suppressor machinery must occur in such tumors to allow an escape from senescence, thus permitting tumor development. Although BRCA1 mutant breast cancers are usually Her2 negative, a significant percentage of Her2 positive tumors also lose their expression of BRCA1. Such Her2+/BRCA1- tumors might be expected to have a particularly high senescence barrier to overcome. An important RAS senescence effector is the protein NORE1A, which can modulate both p53 and Rb. It is an essential senescence effector of the RAS oncoprotein, and it is often downregulated in breast tumors by promotor methylation. Here we show that NORE1A forms a Her2/RAS regulated, endogenous complex with BRCA1 at sites of replication fork arrest. Suppression of NORE1A blocks senescence induction caused by BRCA1 inactivation and Her2 activation. Thus, NORE1A forms a tumor suppressor complex with BRCA1. Its frequent epigenetic inactivation may facilitate the transformation of Her2+/BRCA1- mediated breast cancer by suppressing senescence.

PMID: 37850614
Score: 10
Abstract: The identification of causal BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants (PVs) in epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) aids the selection of patients for genetic counselling and treatment decision-making. Current recommendations therefore stress sequencing of all EOCs, regardless of histotype. Although it is recognised that BRCA1/2 PVs cluster in high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas (HGSOC), this view is largely unsubstantiated by detailed analysis. Here, we aimed to analyse the results of BRCA1/2 tumour sequencing in a centrally revised, consecutive, prospective series including all EOC histotypes. Sequencing of n = 946 EOCs revealed BRCA1/2 PVs in 125 samples (13%), only eight of which were found in non-HGSOC histotypes. Specifically, BRCA1/2 PVs were identified in high-grade endometrioid (3/20; 15%), low-grade endometrioid (1/40; 2.5%), low-grade serous (3/67; 4.5%), and clear cell (1/64; 1.6%) EOCs. No PVs were identified in any mucinous ovarian carcinomas tested. By re-evaluation and using loss of heterozygosity and homologous recombination deficiency analyses, we then assessed: (1) whether the eight 'anomalous' cases were potentially histologically misclassified and (2) whether the identified variants were likely causal in carcinogenesis. The first 'anomalous' non-HGSOC with a BRCA1/2 PV proved to be a misdiagnosed HGSOC. Next, germline BRCA2 variants, found in two p53-abnormal high-grade endometrioid tumours, showed substantial evidence supporting causality. One additional, likely causal variant, found in a p53-wildtype low-grade serous ovarian carcinoma, was of somatic origin. The remaining cases showed retention of the BRCA1/2 wildtype allele, suggestive of non-causal secondary passenger variants. We conclude that likely causal BRCA1/2 variants are present in high-grade endometrioid tumours but are absent from the other EOC histotypes tested. Although the findings require validation, these results seem to justify a transition from universal to histotype-directed sequencing. Furthermore, in-depth functional analysis of tumours harbouring BRCA1/2 variants combined with detailed revision of cancer histotypes can serve as a model in other BRCA1/2-related cancers. © 2023 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 37797621
Score: 10
Abstract: The tumor-suppressor breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) in complex with BRCA1-associated really interesting new gene (RING) domain 1 (BARD1) is a RING-type ubiquitin E3 ligase that modifies nucleosomal histone and other substrates. The importance of BRCA1-BARD1 E3 activity in tumor suppression remains highly controversial, mainly stemming from studying mutant ligase-deficient BRCA1-BARD1 species that we show here still retain significant ligase activity. Using full-length BRCA1-BARD1, we establish robust BRCA1-BARD1-mediated ubiquitylation with specificity, uncover multiple modes of activity modulation, and construct a truly ligase-null variant and a variant specifically impaired in targeting nucleosomal histones. Cells expressing either of these BRCA1-BARD1 separation-of-function alleles are hypersensitive to DNA-damaging agents. Furthermore, we demonstrate that BRCA1-BARD1 ligase is not only required for DNA resection during homology-directed repair (HDR) but also contributes to later stages for HDR completion. Altogether, our findings reveal crucial, previously unrecognized roles of BRCA1-BARD1 ligase activity in genome repair via HDR, settle prior controversies regarding BRCA1-BARD1 ligase functions, and catalyze new efforts to uncover substrates related to tumor suppression.

PMID: 37762697
Score: 10
Abstract: BRCA1 is a key player in maintaining genomic integrity with multiple functions in DNA damage response (DDR) mechanisms. Due to its thiol-rich zinc-complexing domain, the protein may also be a potential target for redox-active and/or thiol-reactive (semi)metal compounds. The latter includes trivalent inorganic arsenic, which is indirectly genotoxic via induction of oxidative stress and inhibition of DNA repair pathways. In the present study, we investigated the effect of NaAsO2 on the transcriptional and functional DDR. Particular attention was paid to the potential impairment of BRCA1-mediated DDR mechanisms by arsenite by comparing BRCA1-deficient and -proficient cells. At the transcriptional level, arsenite itself activated several DDR mechanisms, including a pronounced oxidative stress and DNA damage response, mostly independent of BRCA1 status. However, at the functional level, a clear BRCA1 dependency was observed in both cell cycle regulation and cell death mechanisms after arsenite exposure. Furthermore, in the absence of arsenite, the lack of functional BRCA1 impaired the largely error-free homologous recombination (HR), leading to a shift towards the error-prone non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ). Arsenic treatment also induced this shift in BRCA1-proficient cells, indicating BRCA1 inactivation. Although BRCA1 bound to DNA DSBs induced via ionizing radiation, its dissociation was impaired, similarly to the downstream proteins RAD51 and RAD54. A shift from HR to NHEJ by arsenite was further supported by corresponding reporter gene assays. Taken together, arsenite appears to negatively affect HR via functional inactivation of BRCA1, possibly by interacting with its RING finger structure, which may compromise genomic stability.

PMID: 37789001
Score: 9
Abstract: The BRCA1/BARD1 complex plays a key role in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) in both somatic cells and germ cells. However, the underlying molecular mechanism by which this complex mediates DSB repair is not fully understood. Here, we examined the XY body of male germ cells, where DSBs are accumulated. We show that the recruitment of the BRCA1/BARD1 complex to the unsynapsed axis of the XY body is mediated by pre-ribosomal RNA (pre-rRNA). Similarly, the BRCA1/BARD1 complex associates with pre-rRNA in somatic cells, which not only forms nuclear foci in response to DSBs, but also targets the BRCA1/BARD1 complex to DSBs. The interactions between the BRCT domains of the BRCA1/BARD1 complex and pre-rRNA induce liquid-liquid phase separations, which may be the molecular basis of DSB-induced nuclear foci formation of the BRCA1/BARD1 complex. Moreover, cancer-associated mutations in the BRCT domains of BRCA1 and BARD1 abolish their interactions with pre-rRNA. Pre-rRNA also mediates BRCA1-dependent homologous recombination, and suppression of pre-rRNA biogenesis sensitizes cells to PARP inhibitor treatment. Collectively, this study reveals that pre-rRNA is a functional partner of the BRCA1/BARD1 complex in the DSB repair.

PMID: 37761820
Score: 9
Abstract: The hypermethylation status of the promoter region of the breast cancer 1 (BRCA1), a well-known tumor suppressor gene, has been extensively investigated in the last two decades as a potential biomarker for breast cancer. In this retrospective study, we investigated the prevalence of BRCA1 promoter methylation in 84 human breast tissues, and we correlated this epigenetic silencing with the clinical and histopathological parameters of breast cancer. We used methylation-specific PCR (MSP) to analyze BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation in 48 malignant breast tumors (MBTs), 15 normal adjacent tissues (NATs), and 21 benign breast lesions (BBLs). The results showed that BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was higher in MBTs (20/48; 41.67%) and NATs (7/15; 46.67%) compared to BBLs (4/21; 19.05%). The high percentage of BRCA1 hypermethylation in the histologically normal adjacent tissues to the tumors (NATs) suggests the involvement of this epigenetic silencing as a potential biomarker of the early genomic instability in NATs surrounding the tumors. The detection of BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation in BBLs reinforces this suggestion, knowing that a non-negligible rate of benign breast lesions was reported to evolve into cancer. Moreover, our results indicated that the BRCA1 promoter hypermethylated group of MBTs exhibited higher rates of aggressive features, as indicated by the SBR III grade (14/19; 73.68%), elevated Ki67 levels (13/16; 81.25%), and Her2 receptor overexpression (5/20; 25%). Finally, we observed a concordance (60%) in BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation status between malignant breast tumors and their paired histologically normal adjacent tissues. This study highlights the role of BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation as a potential useful biomarker of aggressiveness in MBTs and as an early marker of genomic instability in both histological NATs and BBLs.

PMID: 37878345
Score: 8
Abstract: Breast cancer is the most common cancer in females, affecting one in every eight women and accounting for the majority of cancer-related deaths in women worldwide. Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are significant risk factors for specific subtypes of breast cancer. BRCA1 mutations are associated with basal-like breast cancers, whereas BRCA2 mutations are associated with luminal-like disease. Defects in mammary epithelial cell differentiation have been previously recognized in germline BRCA1/2 mutation carriers even before cancer incidence. However, the underlying mechanism is largely unknown. Here, we employ spatial transcriptomics to investigate defects in mammary epithelial cell differentiation accompanied by distinct microenvironmental alterations in preneoplastic breast tissues from BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and normal breast tissues from non-carrier controls. We uncovered spatially defined receptor-ligand interactions in these tissues for the investigation of autocrine and paracrine signaling. We discovered that β1-integrin-mediated autocrine signaling in BRCA2-deficient mammary epithelial cells may differ from BRCA1-deficient mammary epithelial cells. In addition, we found that the epithelial-to-stromal paracrine signaling in the breast tissues of BRCA1/2 mutation carriers is greater than in control tissues. More integrin-ligand pairs were differentially correlated in BRCA1/2-mutant breast tissues than non-carrier breast tissues with more integrin receptor-expressing stromal cells. Implications: These results suggest alterations in the communication between mammary epithelial cells and the microenvironment in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers, laying the foundation for designing innovative breast cancer chemo-prevention strategies for high-risk patients.

PMID: 37823591
Score: 8
Abstract: Chromatin association of the BRCA1-BARD1 heterodimer is critical to promote homologous recombination repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) in S/G2. How the BRCA1-BARD1 complex interacts with chromatin that contains both damage induced histone H2A ubiquitin and inhibitory H4K20 methylation is not fully understood. We characterised BRCA1-BARD1 binding and enzymatic activity to an array of mono- and di-nucleosome substrates using biochemical, structural and single molecule imaging approaches. We found that the BRCA1-BARD1 complex preferentially interacts and modifies di-nucleosomes over mono-nucleosomes, allowing integration of H2A Lys-15 ubiquitylation signals with other chromatin modifications and features. Using high speed- atomic force microscopy (HS-AFM) to monitor how the BRCA1-BARD1 complex recognises chromatin in real time, we saw a highly dynamic complex that bridges two nucleosomes and associates with the DNA linker region. Bridging is aided by multivalent cross-nucleosome interactions that enhance BRCA1-BARD1 E3 ubiquitin ligase catalytic activity. Multivalent interactions across nucleosomes explain how BRCA1-BARD1 can recognise chromatin that retains partial di-methylation at H4 Lys-20 (H4K20me2), a parental histone mark that blocks BRCA1-BARD1 interaction with nucleosomes, to promote its enzymatic and DNA repair activities.

PMID: 37809048
Score: 8
Abstract: Tumors harboring homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) are considered optimal candidates for poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP) inhibitor treatment. Such deficiency can be detected by analyzing breast cancer type (BRCA)1/2 gene mutations, as well as mutations in other genes of the homologous recombination pathway. The algorithmic measurement of the HRD effect by identifying genomic instability (GI) has been used as biomarker. As compared with the direct measurement of somatic gene alterations, this approach increases the number of patients who could benefit from PARP inhibitor treatment. In the present study, the performance of the Oncoscan CNV assay, accompanied by appropriate bioinformatic algorithms, was evaluated for its performance in GI calculation and was compared with that of a validated next-generation sequencing (NGS) test (myChoice HRD test). In addition, the clinical utility of the GI score (GIS) and BRCA1/2 tumor analysis were investigated in a cohort of 444 patients with ovarian cancer. For that reason, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays and appropriate bioinformatics algorithms were used to calculate GIS in 29 patients with ovarian cancer with known GIS status using a validated NGS test. Furthermore, BRCA1/2 analysis results were compared between the aforementioned assay and the amplicon-based Oncomine™ BRCA Research Assay. BRCA1/2 analysis was performed in 444 patients with ovarian cancer, while GIS was calculated in 175 BRCA1/2-negative cases. The bioinformatics algorithm developed for GIS calculation in combination with NGS BRCA1/2 analysis (RediScore), and the OncoscanR pipeline exhibited a high overall agreement with the validated test (93.1%). In addition, the Oncomine NGS assay had a 100% agreement with the validated test. The BRCA1/2 mutation frequency was 26.5% in the examined patients with ovarian cancer. GIS was positive in 40% of the BRCA1/2-negative cases. The RediScore bioinformatics algorithm developed for GIS calculation in combination with NGS BRCA1/2 analysis is a viable and effective approach for HRD calculation in patients with ovarian cancer, offering a positive prediction for PARP inhibitor responsiveness in 55% of the patients.

