PMID: 37920918
Score: 25
Abstract: This study aims to explore the effect in each stage of chronic kidney disease (CKD) on the major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) in diabetes mellitus (DM) patients with peripheral arterial disease (PAD). A total of 246 DM patients with diagnosed PAD were enrolled in this study. Of these, 86 patients (35%) died and 34 patients had non-fatal cardiovascular events occurred at the last 7 years follow-up. The baseline eGFR obtained from the first quantified eGFR value within 6 months from the date of enrollment estimated using the Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI). Then, based on eGFR at entry, we defined CKD as an eGFR < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2, and stratified all patients into four groups: eGFR-1, normal eGFR (≥90 mL/min/1.73 m2); eGFR-2, mildly decreased eGFR (60-89 mL/min/1.73 m2); eGFR-3, moderately decreased eGFR (30-59 mL/min/1.73 m2); and eGFR-4, severely decreased eGFR (<30 mL/min/1.73 m2). The mean eGFR was 54.4 ± 28.9 mL/min/1.73m2, and more than 30% of all patients had CKD (eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73m2). The seven-year cumulative incidence of MACE was 29.8% (95% confident interval [95% CI] 15.5-35.7) for eGFR-1 group, 40.4% (95% CI 27.4-45.2) for eGFR-2group, 66.2% (95% CI 47.6-71.4) for eGFR-3 group, and 94% (95% CI 75.0-99.0) for eGFR-4 group. In addition, after adjustment, hazard ratio (HR) for MACE was 2.36 (95% CI 1.26-4.40) in the eGFR-3 group and 7.62 (95% CI 3.71-15.66) in the eGFR-4 group. Restricted mean survival time (RMST) for survival analysis was consistent with HR in this study. After adjusting confounders, relative to eGFR-1 group, an association between the eGFR group and MACE outcome was found only in eGFR-3 group and eGFR-4 group. The moderate to severe reduction in eGFR, was an independent risk factor for MACE among DM patients with PAD throughout a 7-year follow-up duration. Thus, early CKD screening might be essential in the management of diabetic patients with PAD.

PMID: 37890211
Score: 10
Abstract: A novel series of ethylidenehydrazineylthiazol-4(5H)-ones were synthesized using various eco-friendly one-pot multicomponent synthetic techniques. The anticancer activity of compounds (4a-m) was tested against 11 cancer cell lines. While the IC50 of all compounds was evaluated against the most sensitive cell lines (MDA-MB-468 and FaDu). Our SAR study pinpointed that compound 4a, having a phenyl substituent, exhibited a significant growth inhibition % against all cancer cell lines. The frontier anticancer candidates against the MDA-MB-468 were also examined against the wild EGFR (EGFR-WT) and mutant EGFR (EGFR-T790M) receptors. Most of the synthesized compounds exhibited a higher inhibitory potential against EGFR-T790M than the wild type of EGFR. Remarkably, compound 4k exhibited the highest inhibitory activity against both EGFR-WT and EGFR-T790M with IC50 values (0.051 and 0.021 µM), respectively. The pro-apoptotic protein markers (p53, BAX, caspase 3, caspase 6, caspase 8, and caspase 9) and the anti-apoptotic key marker (BCL-2) were also measured to propose a mechanism of action for the compound 4k as an apoptotic inducer for MDA-MB-468. Investigation of the cell cycle arrest potential of compound 4k was also conducted on MDA-MB-468 cancer cells. We also evaluated the inhibitory activities of compounds (4a-m) against both EGFR-WT and EGFR-T790M using two different molecular docking processes.

PMID: 37914903
Score: 9
Abstract: Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) serve as molecular targets for the development of novel personalized therapies in many malignancies. In the present study, expression pattern of receptor tyrosine kinases and its clinical significance in orbital RMS has been explored. Eighteen patients with histopathologically confirmed orbital RMS formed part of this study. Comprehensive q-PCR gene expression profiles of 19 RTKs were generated in the cases and controls. The patients were followed up for 59.53 ± 20.93 years. Clustering and statistical analysis tools were applied to identify the significant combination of RTKs associated with orbital rhabdomyosarcoma patients. mRNA overexpression of RTKs which included MET, AXL, EGFR was seen in 60-80% of cases; EGFR3, IGFR2, FGFR1, RET, PDGFR1, VEGFR2, PDGFR2 in 30-60% of cases; and EGFR4, FGFR3,VEGFR3 and ROS,IGFR1, EGFR1, FGFR2, VEGFR1 in 10-30% of cases. Immunoexpression of MET was seen in 89% of cases. A significant association was seen between MET mRNA and its protein expression. In all the cases MET gene expression was associated with worst overall survival (P = 0.03).There was a significant correlation of MET mRNA expression with RET, ROS, AXL, FGFR1, FGFR3, PDGFR1, IGFR1, VEGFR2, and EGFR3 genes. Association between MET gene and collective expression of RTKs was further evaluated by semi-supervised gene cluster analysis and Principal component analysis, which showed well-separated tumor clusters. MET gene overexpression could be a useful biomarker for identifying high risk orbital rhabdomyosarcoma patients. Well-separated tumor clusters confirmed the association between MET gene and collective expression of RTK genes. Therefore, the therapeutic potential of multi-kinase inhibitors targeting MET and the 9 other significant RTKs needs to be explored.

PMID: 37913585
Score: 9
Abstract: Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR TKIs) have demonstrated the ability to impede tumor cell proliferation by suppressing EGFR expression. Nonetheless, patients undergoing treatment may acquire resistance, which may occur through an EGFR-dependent (such as T790M mutation) or an EGFR-independent (such as c-Met amplification) manner. Therefore, developing dual-target inhibitors might present a potential avenue for addressing treatment-acquired resistance in patients. Herein, we designed, synthesized, and screened several novel 4-phenoxyquinazoline derivatives, aiming to identify a potent dual EGFR/c-Met inhibitor for the treatment of NSCLC, among which H-22 emerged as the most promising candidate exhibiting significant antitumor properties. Moreover, we assessed the in vitro inhibitory effect of H-22 on EGFR kinase and c-Met kinase in five cancer cell lines. In addition, a series of functional experiments (cell cycle, apoptosis assays, in vitro/in vivo animal model, etc.) were conducted to further investigate the anti-tumor mechanisms of H-22. The present study revealed that H-22 exhibited strong antitumor activity both in vitro and in vivo. Interestingly, H-22 exhibited anti-proliferative activity (2.27-3.35 μM) similar to Afatinib against all five cancer cells, with inhibitory functions against EGFRWT, EGFRL858R/T790M, and c-Met kinases at a concentration of 64.8, 305.4 and 137.4 nM, respectively. Cell cycle analysis indicated that the antiproliferative activity of H-22 was associated with its ability to cause G2/M arrest. Furthermore, in vivo data showed that H-22 could inhibit tumor growth in our xenograft models and induce apoptosis. Collectively, our findings uncovered that H-22 is a novel dual EGFR and c-Met inhibitor and a prospective anti-tumor therapeutic drug.

PMID: 37903221
Score: 9
Abstract: Highly homologous E3 ubiquitin ligases, Cbl and Cbl-b, mediate ubiquitination of EGF receptor (EGFR), leading to its endocytosis and lysosomal degradation. Cbl and Cbl-b, are thought to function in a redundant fashion by binding directly to phosphorylated Y1045 (pY1045) of EGFR and indirectly via the Grb2 adaptor. Unexpectedly, we found that inducible expression of Cbl or Cbl-b mutants lacking the E3 ligase activity but fully capable of EGFR binding does not significantly affect EGFR ubiquitination and endocytosis in human oral squamous cell carcinoma (HSC3) cells which endogenously express Cbl-b at a relatively high level. Each endogenous Cbl species remained associated with ligand-activated EGFR in the presence of an overexpressed counterpart species or its mutant, although Cbl-b overexpression partially decreased Cbl association with EGFR. Binding to pY1045 was the preferential mode for Cbl-b:EGFR interaction, whereas Cbl relied mainly on the Grb2-dependent mechanism. Overexpression of the E3-dead mutant of Cbl-b slowed down EGF-induced degradation of active EGFR, while this mutant and a similar mutant of Cbl did not significantly affect MAPK/ERK1/2 activity. EGF-guided chemotaxis migration of HSC3 cells was diminished by overexpression of the E3-dead Cbl-b mutant but was not significantly affected by the E3-dead Cbl mutant. By contrast, the inhibitory effect of the same Cbl mutant on the migration of OSC-19 cells expressing low Cbl-b levels was substantially stronger than that of the Cbl-b mutant. Altogether, our data demonstrate that Cbl and Cbl-b may operate independently through different modes of EGFR binding to jointly control receptor ubiquitination, endocytic trafficking and signaling.

PMID: 37879869
Score: 9
Abstract: The incidence and mortality of lung cancer rank first among malignant tumors in China. Among them, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most important pathological type, accounting for 80%-85% of lung cancer patients, including adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and other pathological subtypes. In recent years, with the discovery of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene and the successful development of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), the treatment efficacy of stage Ⅳ NSCLC patients with EGFR gene sensitive mutation has been greatly improved. As of August 23, 2023, the first generation EGFR-TKIs, gefitinib, icotinib, and erlotinib; the second generation EGFR-TKIs, afatinib and dacomitinib; and the third generation EGFR-TKIs, osimertinib, almonertinib, furmonertinib and befotertinib were all approved for marketing by China National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). In addition, multiple domestic third-generation EGFR-TKIs are undergoing clinical trials, such as rezivertinib (BPI-7711), limertinib (ASK120067), and oritinib (SH-1028). Meanwhile, mobocertinib and sunvozertinib, which targets EGFR 20ins mutations, were also approved by NMPA. With the increasing variety of EGFR-TKIs approved for marketing subsequently, it brings confusion to clinicians when choosing specific medications, and there is an urgent need to develop relevant treatment guidelines. Hence, the Medical Oncology Branch of China International Exchange and Promotive Association for Medical and Health Care and the Chinese Association for Clinical Oncologists convened experts to integrate the research results of various EGFR-TKIs, and proposed the "China clinical practice guideline for epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in stage Ⅳ non-small cell lung cancer (version 2023)", to provide reference for better clinical practice.

PMID: 37921704
Score: 8
Abstract: Non-small cell lung cancer, head and neck cancer, glioblastoma, and various other cancer types often demonstrate persistent elevation in EGFR tyrosine kinase activity due to acquired mutations in its kinase domain. Any alteration in the EGFR is responsible for triggering the upregulation of tumor angiogenic pathways, such as the PI3k-AKT-mTOR pathway, MAPK-ERK pathway and PLC-Ƴ pathway, which are critically involved in promoting tumor angiogenesis in cancer cells. The emergence of frequently occurring EGFR kinase domain mutations (L858R/T790M/C797S) that confer resistance to approved therapeutic agents has presented a significant challenge for researchers aiming to develop effective and well-tolerated treatments against tumor angiogenesis. In this study, we directed our efforts towards the rational design and development of novel quinazoline derivatives with the potential to act as antagonists against both wild-type and mutant EGFR. Our approach encompasing the application of advanced drug design strategies, including structure-based virtual screening, molecular docking, molecular dynamics, metabolic reactivity and cardiotoxicity prediction studies led to the identification of two prominent lead compounds: QU648, for EGFRwt inhibition and QU351, for EGFRmt antagonism. The computed binding energies of selected leads and their molecular dynamics simulations exhibited enhanced conformational stability of QU648 and QU351 when compared to standard drugs Erlotinib and Afatinib. Notably, the lead compounds also demonstrated promising pharmacokinetic properties, metabolic reactivity, and cardiotoxicity profiles. Collectively, the outcomes of our study provide compelling evidence supporting the potential of QU648 and QU351 as prominent anti-angiogenic agents, effectively inhibiting EGFR activity across various cancer types harboring diverse EGFR mutations.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

PMID: 37887540
Score: 8
Abstract: Osimertinib has become the preferred first-line therapy for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation-positive metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in recent years. Originally, it was approved for second-line treatment after epidermal growth factor receptor EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of the first and second generations had failed and EGFR T790M had emerged as a mode of resistance. Osimertinib itself provokes a wide array of on- and off-target molecular alterations that can limit therapeutic success. Liquid biopsy ctDNA (circulating tumor DNA) analysis by hybrid capture (HC) next-generation sequencing (NGS) can help to identify alterations in a minimally invasive way and allows for the detection of common as well as rare resistance alterations. We describe a young female patient who was initially diagnosed with metastatic EGFR L858R-positive NSCLC. She received EGFR TKI therapy at different timepoints during the course of the disease and developed sequential EGFR resistance alterations (EGFR T790M and C797S). In the course of her disease, resistance alteration became undetectable, and the tumor was successfully rechallenged with the original first-generation EGFR TKI as well as osimertinib and altogether showed prolonged response despite a prognostically negative TP53 alteration. To date, the patient has been alive for more than seven years, though initially diagnosed with a heavy metastatic burden.

PMID: 37880647
Score: 8
Abstract: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with sensitizing oncogenic driver mutations benefit from targeted therapies. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors are highly effective against classic sensitizing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations, such as exon 19 deletions and exon 21 L858R point mutations. Conversely, EGFR exon 20 insertions (exon20ins) are resistant to the traditional EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). In May 2021, the US Federal Drug Administration (FDA) provided accelerated approval to amivantamab (Rybrevant) in adults with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with EGFR exon20ins after treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Amivantamab was the first EGFR/MET bispecific antibody to be approved specifically for EGFR exon20ins where there was an unmet need. Furthermore, amivantamab is being evaluated in additional settings such as post osimertinib in sensitizing EGFR mutations as well as in MET altered NSCLC. Here we discuss amivantamab in regard to its mechanism of action, preclinical and clinical data, and clinical impact for patients with EGFR exon20ins NSCLC and beyond.

PMID: 37872375
Score: 8
Abstract: This cross-sectional study investigated the association between the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), a measure of chronic kidney disease (CKD), and cognitive impairment. We used data from 6215 Japanese individuals registered in the Suita Study. Cognitive impairment was defined as a Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score of ≤ 26. Logistic regression was used to calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) of cognitive impairment for eGFR 45-59.9 and < 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (mild and moderate-to-severe eGFR reductions) compared to eGFR ≥ 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 (normal eGFR). The results showed that both mild and moderate-to-severe eGFR reductions were associated with cognitive impairment: ORs (95% CIs) = 1.49 (1.22-1.83) and 2.35 (1.69-3.26), respectively (p-trend < 0.001). Each increment of eGFR by 10 mL/min/1.73m2 was associated with 4.8% lower odds of cognitive impairment. In conclusion, eGFR reduction was associated with cognitive impairment. Managing CKD is essential for preventing cognitive impairment.

